.TH ALLELEGATOR 1 "2026-06-11" "AlleleGator 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
allelegator \- AlleleGator: terminal allele aligner and visualizer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B allelegator
.RI [ INPUTS .\|.\|.]
.RI [ options ]
.PP
.B gator
is a shorter alias for
.BR allelegator ;
the two commands are identical.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B AlleleGator
aligns multiple allele sequences of a single gene and renders the alignment in
the terminal so the columns that differ stand out. Input sequences may come from
local FASTA files, NCBI accession IDs fetched over the network, or the bundled
APOE sample. Protein and nucleotide sequences are supported and auto-detected;
mixing the two in one run is an error.
.PP
A handful of allele sequences is often only a few hundred bytes of text, yet
impossible to compare by eye in its raw form. AlleleGator produces either a full
colored alignment with a consensus row, or a compact view listing only the
variant columns.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I INPUTS
Zero or more FASTA file paths and/or NCBI accession IDs, mixed freely. A token
that exists as a file is parsed as FASTA; any other token is treated as an
accession and fetched from NCBI. Any token may carry a friendly name in the form
.IR SOURCE = Label
(for example
.BR NP_416871.1=MG1655 );
the label is shown in the alignment and is the name to pass to
.BR \-\-ref .
If a labelled file holds several records, the label is suffixed with an index.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-sample
Use the bundled APOE allele sample (\(*e2/\(*e3/\(*e4). Ignores
.IR INPUTS .
.TP
.B \-\-diff
Show the compact variant-only view: a summary line plus a table of just the
columns where the alleles disagree.
.TP
.BI \-\-ref " [NAME]"
Show the dot-identity view. One reference sequence is printed in full as the top
row; every other row shows a dot
.RB ( . )
where it matches the reference and the differing residue otherwise. With no
.IR NAME ,
the first input sequence is the reference; otherwise the named sequence is used.
.TP
.BI \-\-fetch " ID " [ID .\|.\|.]
Explicitly fetch these accession IDs from NCBI E-utilities.
.TP
.BI \-\-db " DB"
Force the NCBI database to query
.RB ( protein
or
.BR nuccore );
otherwise it is guessed from the accession prefix.
.TP
.BI \-\-start " N"
First residue or base number shown on the ruler. Default is 1. Use this to match
an external numbering scheme (for example
.B \-\-start 87
for a trimmed protein region).
.TP
.BI \-\-width " N"
Number of alignment columns per wrapped block. Default is 60.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color, for piping output or plain terminals.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version number and exit.
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a help message and exit.
.SH OUTPUT
In the default
.B full
view, the alignment is shown in wrapped blocks. Each block has a numbered ruler,
one row per allele, and a
.B cons
row that marks fully-conserved columns with an asterisk
.RB ( * ).
Columns where the alleles disagree are shown in bold red across every row.
.PP
In the
.B \-\-diff
view, a one-line summary (alignment length, percent identical columns, number of
variant columns) is followed by a table with one row per variant column, giving
the position and the residue each allele carries there.
.PP
In the
.B \-\-ref
view, the reference row is shown in full and the other rows are reduced to dots
at every position that matches the reference, so only the differences carry a
visible letter.
.SH ALIGNMENT METHOD
AlleleGator builds a center-star multiple sequence alignment. It selects the
sequence with the highest summed pairwise similarity as the center, aligns every
other sequence to it with Needleman\-Wunsch global alignment, and merges induced
gaps so that columns remain consistent. The gap penalty is set harsher than a
mismatch so that near-identical, equal-length alleles align by substitution
rather than introducing spurious gaps. This targets the common case of alleles
of one gene; it is not intended to replace tools such as MUSCLE or MAFFT on
highly divergent sequences.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
A load error (bad FASTA, failed NCBI fetch), fewer than two sequences, or mixed
protein/nucleotide input.
.TP
.B 2
No inputs were given and
.B \-\-sample
was not used.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Render the bundled APOE alleles:
.B allelegator \-\-sample
.TP
Show only what differs:
.B allelegator \-\-sample \-\-diff
.TP
Align local FASTA files:
.B allelegator a.fasta b.fasta c.fasta
.TP
Fetch two protein records from NCBI and align them:
.B allelegator NP_000032.1 NP_000041.1
.TP
Compare EvgS across E. coli strains as a dot-identity view:
.B allelegator NP_416871.1=MG1655 WPV06440.1=O157 \-\-ref MG1655
.SH FILES
.TP
.I allelgator/data/apoe_alleles.fasta
The bundled APOE allele sample.
.TP
.I examples/ecoli_gad.fasta
An example nucleotide alignment (E. coli gadA/gadB) validated against T-COFFEE.
.TP
.I examples/ecoli_evgs.fasta
An example protein alignment (E. coli EvgS sensor kinase across 10 strains) for
the dot-identity view.
.SH CITING ALLELEGATOR
If you use AlleleGator in published or shared work, please include the
following acknowledgement:
.PP
.RS
Sequence alignments were produced with AlleleGator v0.1.0 (Martin, 2026),
https://github.com/erimar77/allelegator.
.RE
.PP
and cite it as:
.PP
.RS
Martin, E. (2026). AlleleGator: a terminal allele aligner and visualizer
(Version 0.1.0) [Computer software]. https://github.com/erimar77/allelegator
.RE
.PP
Please note the version you used (run
.B allelegator \-\-version )
so the exact analysis can be reproduced.
.SH SEE ALSO
T-COFFEE(1), muscle(1), mafft(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Built with AlleleGator.
